EBAT SUMMARY


Deep learning technologies are getting popular day by day in recent years. It takes so many places in our life which is giving them basic instructions and generating it to images or using voice assistants or web softwares like ChatGPT etc. In addition to those places, deep learning is used in healthcare technologies such as CT scans, MRI scans and diagnosing diseases and more of them. Article that I am going to talk about is about deep learning methods for removing hairs in hairy dermoscopic images for skin cancer detection.
 According to the article, methods that are used at present are useful for a few hairy skins or bald skins for detection but not for the hairy skins whose hairs cover the skin.For solving this problem there are two methods that have developed: based on image processing and based on deep learning. In image processing approach, Dullrazor software which is introduces by Lae et al was leading software.Those early algorithms are used by many inpainting techniques like differential equation and logic transmission.Also it can be called that fast marching method (FMM) is one of the strongest for inpainting hair in dermoscopic images which are filled progressively in borders of the hair which is covered by hair.However, image processing is not qualify for more hairy skin surfaces.
 
On the other hand, deep learning approaches have been developed a lot more than image processing. Examples given by authors like Shit-net,DeepFill,GMCNN,PartiaclConv, Lbam are directly related to development progress on deep learning technologies. But methods that are based on machine learning haven’t been developing easily like image processing methods. One of the reasons that is not necessary huge complexity algorithms for average hairy skin cancer detection and the other one is there aren’t enough dataset for train to algorithm.Talavera-Martinez developed a basic coder-encoder architecture with convolutional neural network for solving this problem.And development in those methods bring us to this article. According to the  article, they developed a deep learning method which are consist of image processing and this Talavera-Martinez’s architecture.With image processing, they create a base surface for hair skin and inpaint this skin and with deep learning method they built on this base surface and detailing the image.


According to examples in the article, which are comparisons between old methods and the article's method, we can clearly see that deep learning methods generate more detail and scale than other methods. Deep learning techniques give us a lot of opportunity and hope. for detection of skin cancer and more healthcare problems but as the author says, it can be improvable.in day by day.