Positive and Negative Effects of Technology on Children


Abstract


 Technology is part of life for humans since we exist.Fire, tire, electricity, steam engine and more of those inventions changed our world and lifestyle.But those technologies are not surprising or “new” for the 21st century for today’s people.Today, technology has evolved and evolving something else. Which means as if we call technology right now, we mean internet, mobile devices, mobile media, social media, augmentations etc. These technologies are not like the inventions in the past, because new technologies are impacting our “own” life more than steam engines or other inventions. We can’t put a steam engine or tire in our pocket but we can put new people, new lifes and limitless information in our pockets. With these accessibility opportunities and easily reaching new technologies at first hand is redefining people's lives.Education techniques, transportation systems, new ways of communicating, politics, eating and sleeping habits etc have impacted and changed for old people to young ones and it has positive and negative effects. We can keep in touch with everybody, reach any information, communicate and meet with new people on the Internet, etc. but on the other hand; these positive sides of technology come with negative sides like privacy issues, harmful information, addiction etc.Like before i said, it impacts old people to young ones. In this article, we will check on the positive and negative effects of technology on children. How does technology impact children's lives? Is it right or wrong to give access to mobile and social media to children? How can we guarantee children privacy and security from new technologies?.. We will give an answer to these questions in this article.


Positive Effects of Technology on Children


Education
 Technology has a great role in education. Classrooms are developing day by day. In 2st century, tablets and smart boards take place in classrooms more than books. But we shouldn’t realize that technology is like a machine or a physical object. Let’s deep dive into this subject. In 199, Cheryl Lemke, executive director of the Milken Exchange on Education Technology, made an interview with Technology and Learning Magazine about this topic. There are some important things in this interview to look at. According to this interview, technology usage in education improves basic skills [1].


 Students can learn and absorb the information more quickly. For example, when you try to teach human body parts (like teeth, legs, heads etc.) in a book, there are some painting a body with no shape or reality but with tablets or smart boards, you can zoom in/out the body, animate the parts or can add a sound the parts to remember with simulations. These options can be more interesting and interactive for children [2].


  Like I said before, taking notes with tablets or electronic devices is much easier than reading books. David Dwyer, vice president of advanced learning technology for Computer Curriculum Corporation, said students were found to produce more writing because it was easier to type than write.[3]


 Another thing is technology prepares students for the workforce at a young age. According to the US Department of the Commerce, sixty percent of jobs today require technological skills, and this is expected to increase to ninety percent in the next fifty years [4]. Actually this is an important matter to teach children about technology at an early age. World is in the information and digitization age. Understanding and being able to use technology have an important role in our jobs and lives. When we look at our parents and grandparents, we can clearly see that they are coming back from the young ones because they can’t understand and use the new technology like us, I mean 20 or 30 year old ones. Because of that teaching and giving access to technology to children is too important for children.


 Beside that, like i said before, learning with technology is more interactive and interesting and because of that children are more interested in learning. Solar system modules, a 3D model of a human body, more vivid colors and shapes etc are attractive for children. 
 And there is one more thing to be mentioned: online education. We can’t ignore online education. From now on education is not only given in classrooms or kindergartens. It divides two titles: online classrooms and online websites. 3 years ago, the world was faced with a pandemic called Covid-19. Our physical attractions were reduced and for 1 or 2 years we were at home. Did our jobs in our homes, went to schools on our laptops or tv. As a result of this situation, classrooms turned into online classrooms. Teachers were recording themselves and shared the videos on the school's online classrooms or made the studies with webcams with children. Online classrooms had negative sides like connection problems or less efficient than face to face studying but it prevented children from getting covid.


 Besides the  online classrooms, especially Youtube, Udemy, Duolingo etc apps provide a new way of learning to everybody. Except for school learning on online platforms,  children can learn the basic skills, communicating with people, motor skills, and new hobbies in online websites. For example with online language applications, children can begin to learn a new language and also new culture at an early age. Also with YouTube, children can learn basic skills in communicating ways etc.In addition to this, subtitles and rewatchable online lessons make learning easier to children .We will mention that later but the most important thing is parental control for online studying. Parents decide what should children access online and what information to learn or to see new things online that they never see on children’s social life.


 And the last thing is we shouldn’t ignore children who have disabilities. Technological development helps people with disabilities at every age. Assistive technology to help students with disabilities in classrooms. For example DynaMyte, is a portable communication device that facilitates students with communicative disabilities to speak and converse with others through a keyboard composed of symbols. With these sorts of innovations, it has been estimated that approximately 95% of students with disabilities between the ages of six and eleven are able to receive their education in regular classrooms (ATTO) [5].


Social Life
 Technology changed social life, hobbies,ways of making new friends and communicating.Nowadays children play time activities, social life skills have changed. Older generation children's games are much different than new generations. They required more physical interactions than new ones, also most of them were played outside. For example football, hide and seek, hoop and stick marbles etc are not very popular with children. Nor cardboard games, tabletop role playing games etc are not very popular too. But we shouldn’t criticize this situation as a bad thing. Actually all those games are played by children. They evolved and are evolving today’s technology. Most of them have digital versions now. Which means they can be played both inside and outside. But what I want to say is that digital games come with some benefits. We mentioned that online education helps children with learning. Digital video games provide this too. Let’s dive into digital video games. Common opinions about digital video games are like “they have a lot of violations”, “it is harmful” etc. These are not totally true or false ideas. But we will look at digital video games for children. Games are not developed for adults or young people, also there are many developers for children's games. This is a new sector for game development actually and there is more control than other game development. For example,  my generation, which I’m 21 years old, grew up with digital video games too but games were different from new generations. We played games that were developed for young and adults.There are not many games for children. But today, there are games for especially children. Their purpose is to teach children something. These games are more basic than the others. Children place some shapes into blanks, match colors, use voice to learn the name of an object or animal etc, painting and more like these examples. It provides basic motor skills and gets more attractive to learning. Those games that I mentioned are played mostly by kindergarteners. In addition to these games, there are games for learning a new language or native language.


Besides that, video games and online video games are new ways of socializing. Video games are like movies. They are similar because they create a community with them. When you watch and love Star Wars, you can find people like you and become friends with them. Video games are like that too. Video games have their own story and culture. Children who play video games that are played by other children can come with a common ground and may become friends. The important thing is which game should children play and it is up to parents of course.


 In addition to video games,there is a video game genre called online video games.. Online video games began with 2000’s and have become more popular nowadays. Children went to an Internet cafe to play online games with their friends after school. Then they went outside and ate ice-cream or did something else. It created a new hub for children. But today, neary every home has a laptop, pc or video game console so there are no “after cafe activities”. Instead of this, children come together on online apps and play video games with video calls or voice calls. But in the end it creates new things to talk with friends again. Also it provides for meeting new people online to children. But again, parental control is important.






 Besides the video games for socializing, with the Internet we can access a whole different world. Children can access too and it affects children’s social lives.According to an article in the Los Angeles Times discussing social media in the lives of children, technology may act as a way for children to develop and sustain emotional bonds with peers, as well as carve their own identity [6]. Social media platforms are an important part of our lives now. According to Demand Sage, 4.9 billion people are using social media in March 2023 [7]. Also according to American Academy Of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry,surveys show that ninety percent of teens ages 13-17 have used social media. Seventy five percent report having at least one active social media profile, and 51% report visiting a social media site at least daily [8]. These are huge numbers. Many children already have access to social media and the internet. American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry says that social media usage in children has some benefits. Social media usage provides connection to friends, meeting new friends and sharing interests, like i mentioned before finding community, exploring and expressing themselves [9]. 
 
We can expand this topic. How do children meet with new friends, explore themselves? Facebook is the most popular social media platform and has the most users in the world. Children who have a Facebook account can communicate with their real life friends and can find other friends. Also children can express his/her opinions, describes himself/herself and chat with other children and as a result of this children can communicate better and explore themselves. Besides Facebook, TikTok has become more popular in recent years. Children and teens are using it a lot. It is not like Facebook or Instagram, children can do more physical activities in TikTok actually. We can see that many children and teens dance on TikTok. Music and dancing trends get children to dance, play and get physical. Also these dancing trends are not being alone. Some trends require another partner/partners. Therefore children and parents can meet on common ground, with that parents can know about what children love and do and make more connections with.
 
Technology also provides social life for children with disabilities. It is an important matter actually. Children with disabilities can find friends and communities with the Internet and social media. They can express and explore themselves like the other children. The internet and social media meet in commons for all children. Besides the social media and Internet, newest technologies provide more accessibility for children with disabilities. A child with no leg or no arm can have a prosthesis or children who can’t speak fluently or have a problem with voice or speaking can use the voice bots etc can communicate with others. Technology removes disabilities to some extent. It is evolving and developing day by day fastly but has an important role for children and people with disabilities.




 
 


Safety


 Safety is the major concern for parents. Some of them give their children cell phones or smartphones etc. But what should we do and how technology provides safety? 


 First, start with physical safety. Being heard of where their children are is the major concern for parents as we said. With technology, there are some solutions for this. Cell phones make phone calls and texting, smartphones can access the internet so it can provide more ways of communicating with parents. It can be both usable, it is up to parents. In addition to them, there are two ways of keeping track of children: smartwatch and child friendly cell phones.
 Smartwatches can make calls, text and share location information. They can’t have access to the Internet, YouTube or other social media platforms and cannot play games on them like cell phones and smartphones; so they are acceptable for children. 


 Child friendly cell phones are new and more safer than the others for some parents. For example Firefly is a child friendly cell phone. It uses a fun, simple and completely customizable interface, and features such as parental control and limited capabilities. Having these types of phones allows them to keep track of their children without the risk of racking up a huge bill,  or exposing their children to too much technology at such a young age (firefly.com) [10].According to FBI reports, a child goes missing every forty seconds in the United States [11]. With this data, we can understand why parents are so worried about it. It is important to hear where their child is and communicate with them.


 Beside the physical safety, the other important thing with safety is online safety. We talked about how many children use social media and how they interact with technology. Social media and the Internet come with privacy and safety problems. We know that Facebook is accused of selling private data. Even so it is still the most popular social media platform. For social media profiles, there aren’t any “real” actions to solve privacy problems but parents can do something. The one and only thing is to do parental control for children’s social media accounts. Besides the social media platform, YouTube and Google have child accounts for children. Parents should use it and control it. These account types advertise child content and give access to only child content on surfing the internet. These protection ways prevent much unwanted information and provide better places for children to use. 


Negative Effects of Technology on Children


Education


We mentioned that technology usage has an important role in education but it has some negative effects of course. Interacting with technology affects multitasking ability. According to an article in Time magazine, eight to eighteen year olds spend seven hours and thirty eight minutes a day using entertainment media. As they have become so absorbed into it, that social and entertainment media become a constant distraction [11]. New social media platforms reduced the content times such as TikTok, Instagram reels and YouTube shorts. This content is made of between 10 seconds and 1 minute. When you don’t like the content or finish the content, you can easily switch to another one. As a result of this switching between contents, children’s distractions are reduced. This distractions affect the way children's brains absorb new information, and can lead to continuous partial attention (CPA). Coined by former Microsoft executive, Linda Stone, CPA is the state we enter into when we are using technology and are forced to split our attention between several different tasks. We shift our priority to what is most important, and are constantly paying attention to several things, and yet never giving our full attention to any one task (Time Magazine) [12].
Focusing on many tasks affects and changes children behave and act.They have become unable to focus. According to an article in the New York Times, “multitaskers actually have more trouble focusing and shutting out irrelevant information…and they experience more stress.”[13]. To sum up, focusing on many tasks will have bad effects on children and it requires parental control. 


 Also we talked about online education ways like YouTube etc. We cannot say that all information is right information. Children shouldn’t be able to access all the information. Information that isn't connected with school learning can cause problems with learning. Children can’t decide which is right or not. Also overloading with unnecessary information can cause learning problems too. Children's attention and interest in studying and learning may be reduced with overloading. Actually it is related to multitasking in some ways. Multitasking makes decisions harder, overloading and misinformations decisions wrong and both of them reduce the child’s interest in studying.


Social Life


 Children’s social life interactions changed completely. As we mentioned before, now they can interact with their friends online. When they communicate online, they become an unknown person who can say whatever they want to say or do online while they cannot do in real life. It is different communicating online and face to face. When you communicate online, you cannot know facial expressions, thoughts, personal information like age, where to live etc and cannot talk like in real life because these things are the basis of communicating ways. Becoming an anonymous person for conversations causes children to break to bound with others and themselves.


  According to Cmpbell, hiding behind the digital wall, such as texting or Internet communications, allows children to deal with situations that they wouldn’t want face-to-face, such as ending relationships or dealing with bullies [13]. Unfortunately children deal with bullies in real life, but it is not like online bullies. Real life bullies can be pretended by other people because you know who the bully is and can reach them. But online bullies are not pretended more easily than real life ones because you do not know mostly who the bullies are or if you know who is, you cannot reach them because they can live in another neighborhood, city or even country. Many of them have anonymous accounts and you cannot know if your children are being bullied. Beside the bullying, California State University found a connection between social anxiety and talking online or through text messaging [14].


The other thing is digital video games and social media addiction. This is the huge problem of our century.Without parenting control, children can be addicted to digital video games and social media platforms. Digital video games addiction causes the live in the house only, reducing interaction with people.Also reduce the interest on other hobbies. With unreal worlds and infinite capability in video games can also break the bond between real life and digital life. But it is not valid for video games, actually it contains social media platforms and influencers. You cannot reach everything and cannot do anything in a fantasy world and children cannot notice that like adults or young people. Without noticing this situation, children cannot learn new information in good nick.


Safety


As we mentioned before, safety is the most important thing for parents. Also we mentioned that misinformation is also a safety problem but we will talk about privacy problems for children. Children who have access to social media platforms may be in great danger. First thing is personal information sharing puts children at risk. Dangerous people can reach the children and can  harm them. Let’s expand the personal information. Sharing location is the most risky action to be made in social media for people from any age. No other people shouldn’t know the location of ours and our children. Other thing is sharing photos to everyone is also risky. Nowadays AI image generation bots also can convert personal photos to unwanted versions and besides that children photos can be shared without our permission. We can expand the examples, the matter is using social media platforms is dangerous and must be on parental control.


Health Problems


 We talked about video game addiction and online addiction. The obesity rate in children has tripled in the past 20 years. According to livestrong.com, fifteen percent of children between six and nineteen years old can be considered overweight, with twice as many on the brink of becoming such [15]. Unhealthy foods and less physical activities are main causes of video games addiction. There is a call that “Call of Duty Gamer” for children and other people. This means you eat unhealthy food while playing games and the hours spent on games is like 8-10 hours. It causes children to do activities and go outside. 


And one thing that we must mention about video games is violation in video games. It became a popular opinion in recent years. Most of the games except those not developed for children that we mentioned include violation. Let’s look at a game in the Grand Theft Auto series. In these games players can smuggle, burgle, steal cars and kill an npc (non-playable character). When you think that your child can do that, actually it is an extreme opinion. Because there are not any records of this situation, like a child who plays GTA V killed someone or beat his friend, but there are some results that playing games like that causes aggression in children.  It is a risk and we cannot deny it, but the matter is parental control and telling the child that it is not the real world.


 Another health problem is sleep disorder. Good sleep quality and quantity are positively associated with cognition and academic performance in children. By contrastü poor sleep quality or sleep disorder was associated with a wide range of issues in children such as poor academic performance, behavioral problems, respiratory disease, overweight and obesity [16]. There is a study about this situation, they randomly selected 2278 children aged 3-6 years from 15 kindergartens in Tongling,China. This study showed a J-shaped association between TV viewing time and sleep order, with higher risk of sleep disorder over the threshold of 1h per day. Above the threshold, each 1h per day increment in TV viewing time was associated with an increase of 12.35 in the risk of sleep disorder in total children [17]. Such a high number shows us that children's present and future may be at risk. Unhealthy actions, less performance in school and studying are caused by sleep disorder.


Discussion


 We cannot remove technology from our lives. Because humans develop with new technologies.It is part of our life. We face it in our jobs, schools, books etc.When the main topic is about our children, we cannot decide what to do. Technology comes with good and bad things. Became easy to learn, reaching a whole different world, infinite information, new ways of doing hobbies and communicating, being able to know where the children are but also it has bad things we can’t ignore. Privacy issues, health problems, addictions, multitasking and overloading information etc. Is it right to totally ban technology from children or not ? I think it is not right to remove technology from children's lives. Technology is our life in the 21st century and it will be in the future too. It is involved in our jobs, our eating habits, social life norms. Living and accepting is the right thing to do for me. I grew up with technology, I learned new languages and met new people with technology. I made new hobbies and found new interests. Also I learned a lot of things with technology. Some of them good and some of them bad. But you realize when you get older. The important thing is parental control for technology. Giving full access and uncontrolled times for technology cause many problems. Sleeping disorders, addiction, and socializing are one of the problems. It affects children directly. Also sharing personal information such as location info can cause many problems. Nobody shouldn’t know where you know except friends and parents. Pretending to this, parents control the timing and use of technology. Parents should decide what should their children access on the Internet and how many times their children spend. To sum up, parental control on technology use in children develops children's social life and academic life. Accessing necessary information about their lessons, connecting friends online connects children to today’s world and prepares them for their jobs and future world.


References
Honors Projects S, Hatch Kristina Elizabeth K, Determining the Effect of Technology on Children, 2011. [1],[2],[3],[4],[5],[6],[10],[11],[12],[13]
Zhu R, Fang H, Chen M, Hu X, Cao T, Yang F, Xia K, Screen time and sleep disorder in preschool children: identifying the safe threshold in a digital world, 2020. [15],[16],[17]


Gottschalk F, Impacts of technology use on children: Exploring literature on the brain, cognition and well being, 2019.


Social Media and Teens, American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, Updated March 2018
https://www.aacap.org/AACAP/Families_and_Youth/Facts_for_Families/FFF-Guide/Social-Media-and-Teens-100.aspx#:~:text=Surveys%20show%20that%20ninety%20percent,mobile%20devices%20with%20internet%20capabilities. [8],[9]


Daniel Ruby, Social Media Users In The World — (2023 Demographics), Demand Sage, March 20,2023
https://www.demandsage.com/social-media-users/#:~:text=Over%204.9%20billion%20people%20are,7%20social%20media%20every%20month. [7]




Jamir L, Duggal M, Nehra R, Singh P, Grover S, Epidemiology of technology addiction among school students in rural India, 2019.


Levine L, Waite B, Bowman L, Kachinsky K, Mobile media use by infants and toddlers, 2019.


Crepax T, Muntes-Mulero V, Martinez J, Ruiz A, Information technologies exposing children to privacy risks: Domains and children-specific technical control, 2022.


Beech R, Philip F, Pandyan A, McCluskey M, Evaluation of parental attitudes on the use and effect of technology on physical activity levels in children aged 7 to 11 - A knowledge elicitation study, 2021.


Izumi-Taylor S, Ito Y, Gibbons A, Early childhood pre-service teachers’ perceptions of teaching technology to children in Japan and the United States, 2010.


Dehghan M, Kuhi M, Rezvani S, Esmaeilzadeh S, Samadinezhad H, Basirat Z, Mir F, Khafri S, Ahmadi A, Speech and language development of children born following assisted reproductive technologies, 2020.


Shoshani A, Nelke S, Gritler I, Tablet applications as socializing platforms: The effects of prosocial touch screen applications on young children’s prosocial behavior, 2022.


Hollis C, Livingstone S, Sonuga-Barke E, Editorial: The role of digital technology in children and young people’s mental health- a triple- edged sword? , 2020.